Acta Neurochir (2003) 145: 615–629
DOI 10.1007/s00701-003-0066-6

Clinical Article
The BrainIT group: concept and core dataset definition
I. Piper, G. Citerio, I. Chambers, C. Contant, P. Enblad, H. Fiddes, T. Howells, K. Kiening,
P. Nilsson, and Y. H. Yau for the BrainIT Group
Published online July 23, 2003
# Springer-Verlag 2003

Summary

Part A: BrainIT group concept

Introduction. An open collaborative international network has been
established which aims to improve inter-centre standards for collection
of high-resolution, neurointensive care data on patients with traumatic
brain injury. The group is also working towards the creation of an open
access, detailed and validated database that will be useful for post-hoc
hypothesis testing. In Part A, the underlying concept, the group coordination structure, membership guidelines and database access and publication criteria are described. Secondly, in part B, we describe a set of
meetings funded by the EEC that allowed us to define a ‘‘Core Dataset’’
and we present the results of a feasibility exercise for collection of this
core dataset.
Methods. Four group meetings funded by the EEC have enabled
definition of a ‘‘Core Dataset’’ to be collected from all centres regardless
of specific project aim. A paper based pilot collection of data was
conducted to determine the feasibility for collection of the core dataset.
Specially designed forms to collect the core dataset demographic and
clinical information as well as sample the time-series data elements were
distributed by both email and standard mail to 22 BrainIT centres. A
deadline of two months was set to receive completed forms back from
centres. A pilot data collection of minute by minute physiological
monitoring data was also performed.
Findings. A core-dataset was defined and can be downloaded from the
BrainIT web-site (go to ‘‘Core dataset’’ link at: www.brainit.org).
Eighteen centres (82%) returned completed forms by the set deadline.
Overall the feasibility for collection of the core data elements was high
with only 10 of the 64 questions (16%) showing missing data. Of those
10 fields with missing data, the average number of centres not responding was 12% and the median 6%. An SQL database to hold the data
has been designed and is being tested. Software tools for collection of
the core dataset have been developed. Ethics approval has been granted
for collection of multi-centre data as part of a pilot data collection
study.
Interpretation. The BrainIT network provides a more standardised and
higher resolution data collection mechanism for research groups, organisations and the device industry to conduct multi-centre trials of new
health care technology in patients with traumatic brain injury.

Head injury has devastating economic and social consequences both to the victim and to the society that supports the victim [1]. The incidence of serious head injury
is estimated at 1500 per 100,000 population per annum.
On a European dimension this translates into over a
million hospital admissions with a head injury per year.
Head injury is a leading cause of death in young males
and survivors have serious and long term morbidity. The
loss of employment to the victim and the stress and
increased burden of care to family members have significant social and economic effects upon Europe.
When assessing head injured patients’ outcome from
new therapies or the application of new monitoring
devices, a large number of patients are required [23].
Recruiting patients from multiple centres will significantly
reduce the time to assess new therapy and monitoring.
However, despite the existence of guidelines for the management of severely head injured patients [3, 9, 13, 18, 24]
this group of patients is subject to considerable variability
in care [8, 11, 17]. As a first step towards improving management standards in this population, both the inter and
intra-centre variability in the management and treatment of
these patients needs to be assessed on a multi-national
basis, and to do so requires a more standardised and higher
resolution methodology for acquiring patient management
and monitoring information.
One consequence of the variability in management
that probably exists both across and within centres that
manage patients with TBI (traumatic brain injury), is its
confounding influence upon trials of therapy. There have

Keywords: Head injury; multi-centre network; health technology
assessment.

616

been in the last few years several multi-centre clinical
trials of potential neuroprotective drugs targeted at
patients with brain trauma. However, despite promising
pre-clinical results, all have failed to show efficacy in the
head-injured population. A number of reasons have been
proposed for these failures which include: poor study
design, insufficient dose of drug penetrating the blood
brain barrier and inter-species differences in brain injury
mechanisms.
Another possibility, not as yet systematically examined, is the occurrence of secondary insults which are
missed through use of inappropriate monitoring methods. Even in large scale randomised trials, an efficient
stratification design cannot be made without a knowledge of the incidence of relevant confounding factors.
Improving the standards and resolution for multicentre data collection will also impact upon the assessment of new medical technology of relevance to the
medical device industry. The majority of companies that
develop or support devices used to monitor brain injured
patients in intensive care are small to medium size enterprises. Unlike the pharmaceutical industry, these small
device companies lack the resources to independently
assess their devices in multi-centre studies. This severely
limits the provision of quality evidence demonstrating
the clinical utility of their products.
What is required is an open, collaborative network of
centres interested in developing higher resolution and
more standardised methods for collection of monitoring
and management data from patients with traumatic brain
injury. Such an infrastructure will provide a more efficient means for assessing new and developing health
care technology, whether it is new drugs, management
approaches or new monitoring devices.
Group formation
The idea for the Brain Monitoring with Information
Technology (BrainIT) group came from discussions arising during the 10th International Symposium on Raised
Intracranial Pressure and Neuromonitoring in Brain
Injury held in Williamsburg, USA in May 1997. A few
participants at this meeting, with a specific interest in
neuro-monitoring, agreed that a more open and collaborative approach to the assessment of new monitoring
technology would be a more efficient approach then
continuing our current practice of conducting small
scale, single centre studies.
Collection of minute-by-minute physiological monitoring is now common in many neuro-intensive care

I. Piper et al.

units. However, there are no agreed standards for
defining the collection, summary and analysis of monitoring data, particularly pertaining to data collected
from head injured patients. Cerebral perfusion pressure
(CPP ¼ BP–ICP) monitoring is a good example. When
we report CPP values, how do we correct for differing
policies between centres on the level to which the BP
transducer is zeroed? Tracking changes in bed tilt
(which affects the size of hydrostatic pressure gradients
between the head and heart) is also a significant technical issue without defined standards. As a result of these
factors, it is often difficult to compare even the most
common forms of monitoring when data are presented
at meetings. Development of standards and guidelines in
this area is an important step for the future design and
conduct of trials of new intensive care monitoring and
treatment methods.
From those initial meetings in Williamsburg, a web
site was setup (www.brainit.org) and from the interest
generated, it became clear that many were interested in
the concept of an open collaborative approach to developing standards in this area. Currently there are over 150
members from 35 countries who have registered interest
in the group via the website. It is possible to summarise
the interests of the group into three main aims.
The main aims of the group are:
1. To develop and disseminate improved standards for the
collection, analysis and reporting of intensive care
monitoring data collected from brain injured patients.
2. To provide an efficient multi-centre infra-structure for
generating quality evidence on the utility of new forms
of intensive care monitoring and methods for improving the care and outcome of brain-injured patients.
3. To develop and use a standardised database as a tool
for post hoc hypothesis testing, hypothesis generation
and the development, testing and validation of new
data analysis methodologies.
This paper describes the collaborative approach being
taken by the group and why we believe it will lead to
a more systematic and efficient approach to health care
technology assessment in the management of brain
injured patients. In part A, we describe the group coordination structure, membership guidelines and database access and publication criteria are also described.
In the second part, we describe a set of meetings funded
by the EEC which allowed the group to define a ‘‘Core
Dataset’’ and in this paper we present the results of a
pilot feasibility exercise for collection of this core
dataset.

617

The BrainIT group: concept and core dataset definition

The BrainIT group approach – what
are the differences?
The Ethos of the BrainIT group is one of fostering
open and free collaboration. The approach used, which
we believe is novel in this field of medicine involves the
following key elements:
1. Only high-resolution minute-by-minute monitoring
and detailed management data is collected using
computer based data collection tools. A basic set of
data collection software tools are provided to all data
contributing members free of charge. In addition to
the free tools offered, the group is collaborating with
industry on the development of more sophisticated
data collection technology. A technical sub-group
works towards developing tools and methods to assist
with standardising data collection, analysis and database tools across centres.
2. A project-by-project based collection of data,
where members voluntarily donate their time and
effort towards collection of data for specific projects
in which they are enrolled. The BrainIT group Internet based facilities (Web page and Forum) allow
members either individually or in groups to form
their own projects, enlist interest from other members, attract grant funding and manage their own
project. Individual project PI’s are responsible for
project management, funding and publication of their
results.
3. The data model used differs from previous collaborative groups working within the field of traumatic
brain injury in that data collected as part of individual
projects is also donated to a joint database. Data collection tools used in projects collect, as a minimum, a
‘‘Core Dataset’’ which once collected and anonymised is added to a common database. The common
database will be openly accessible, through the Internet, to all ‘‘Data Contributing’’ centres. The database
will be able to be queried over the Internet and datasets of interest can be downloaded to any member
who has also contributed data to the database.
4. A steering group (including a group statistician), with
overall responsibility for group management, does
not dictate project selection but can help with project
design if required. An important function of the steering group is to track data analyses being performed
on the joint database to ensure a high level of analysis
is maintained. Only officially registered and planned
analyses conducted on ‘‘validated’’ data can lead to
publication and presentation at meetings. The steering

group will ensure that database access, analysis and
publication criteria are adhered to.
5. An important element of the BrainIT group approach is
to continuously work towards the development of improved ‘‘standards’’ for multi-centre collection and analysis of data in this patient population. We have achieved
a key first step in this process by defining minimum
data validation standards and have developed a mechanism for checking the validity of data against original
documentation using regionally hired ‘‘data validation’’
staff. The BrainIT network provides an infrastructure
supporting data quality control for trials of management
or monitoring similar to that required by the Pharmaceutical industry in the conduct of trials of new drugs.
A detailed BrainIT Group ‘‘Operational Strategy’’ document can be viewed and downloaded from the group
web-page (www.brainit.org ! go to Operating Strategy
Link). A sub-set of this document is summarised
below.
Figure 1 Outlines the Group Concept.
Group membership
There are two forms of BrainIT group membership:
Individual Membership and Centre Membership.
Centre membership, in addition to individual membership, is required because it is a centre or institution that
is responsible for allowing local patient data to be used
in research. Each centre has a local principal investigator
responsible for BrainIT database access. Individual
members within centres who are not the centre PI who
wish access to the database must apply to the Steering
group. Membership (both individual and centre) is free.
Individual membership
Pre-requisites for Individual membership are:
– Applicants are clinicians, scientists, engineers or
researchers employed within institutions or organisations supporting the monitoring or management of
brain injured patients.
– Completion of the internet registration form:
www.brainit.org
Centre membership
Pre-requisites for centre membership are the same as
the criteria for individual membership AND:
– Must be contributing data (at least 5 patients core
data per year) to a BrainIT group project.

618

I. Piper et al.

Fig. 1. Graphical Representation of BrainIT Group Concept. Using the Internet as a mechanism linking individual investigators, the BrainIT group
provide web resources (mailbase forum, discussion forum and free access to common data collection tools) to foster formation of project groups.
Project groups are responsible for managing, funding and publishing their own work. Collected data is anonymous and donated to a common
database for the benefit of the entire network. Any data-contributing centre can access the entire common database useful for post-hoc hypothesis
testing and generation. Only ‘‘Validated’’ data can lead to publication and the BrainIT group provides a region-by-region based mechanism for
hiring and managing Data Validation (DV) staff to validate project group data. Validation costs will be generated from a range of resources,
including a contribution from grant funding sourced from individual project group grants. Project and analysis duplication is prevented by a Steering
group maintaining and managing a project and analysis register. A technical group helps develop data collection, analysis and database tools

Benefits of individual membership

Group management, structure and coordination

a) Name and Email Address added to BrainIT Web
Members on-line address book.
b) Membership Certificate
c) Added to circulation list of information on group
events, meetings and newsletters.
d) Access to the Individual Members Section of the
BrainIT Forum allowing members to participate in
project specific forum discussion topics.

With the exception of any fixed contract, project
funded, technical or administrative staff, All BrainIT
steering group, technical group and data contributing
members work voluntarily and do not receive any form
of fee or stipend for the support they provide.
The full group management, organisational structure
and coordination can be viewed from the Operational
Strategy Document which can be downloaded from
the BrainIT Group Web: (www.brainit.org ! go to
Operating Strategy Link)

Benefits of centre membership
a) As for Basic Membership plus the designated PI from
each centre has automatic access to the common
BrainIT Database.
The BrainIT steering group will be responsible for reviewing applications for new or annually renewed centre
membership.

Regional coordination
Each region (usually one but occasionally more than
one country sharing a common language) with more
than one neuro-intensive care centre contributing data
to the BrainIT database has a regional coordinator

The BrainIT group: concept and core dataset definition

providing coordination support for centres within their
region. They also hire, train and support ‘‘Data Validation’’ staff (funding dependant), used to travel to local
centres to train local centre staff in the use of BrainIT
data collection and analysis tools, as well as, conducting
data validation exercises. See the Operational Strategy
Document for an overview of BrainIT Data Validation
Approach.
Legal status
The BrainIT group is a ‘‘not for profit organisation’’
and is currently seeking appropriate legal status. Data
held within the database will be owned by the BrainIT
non-profit making organisation and is accessible only to
data contributing centres or to those directly collaborating with the principal investigator in the data contributing centre.
Guidelines to database access and publication
– All data is stored on a dedicated research data server
at the BrainIT Coordinating Centre.
– Data is anonymous and it will not be possible to tell
from which centre the data originated.
– Data will be searchable by the project title which was
responsible for the data to be collected.
– As not all projects have funding which will allow data
to be validated against original documentation, data
will also be searchable upon whether it is
‘‘Validated’’ or ‘‘Not Validated’’.
Database access=analysis criteria
1. Those wishing to access the database must themselves be from centres that have contributed data
to the database.
2. Centres must contribute at least 5 ‘‘Core Dataset’’
patients per year to maintain database access in any
given year.
3. Only the PI in each centre contributing data will
have automatic access to the common database.
Other individuals within centres contributing data
may be given access to the database at the discretion
of the local PI, however, the local PI remains
responsible for any analyses performed on the data
accessed from their centre. Where there is conflict
between the local PI and Individual members within
the same centre, the BrainIT Steering Group will
determine which other individuals may access the
joint database.

619

4. Only ‘‘Validated’’ data should be used in analyses
intended for publication or submission as an
abstract to a local or international meeting. See
the ‘‘Operational Strategy’’ document for details of
the data validation approach: (www.brainit.org !
go to Operating Strategy Link)
5. Unvalidated data may be accessed and used in analyses intended for hypothesis generation or post-hoc
hypothesis testing, but may not be used in analyses
intended for publication.
6. All data sent to the database must have been
produced from research studies where the protocols
for those studies have been approved by the sending
institution’s local ethics committee. A copy of the
letter of approval must be lodged with the BrainIT
coordinating centre.
7. Individual patients must not be identifiable from
the data sent to the database and the data collection protocols used must conform to the Helsinki
Accords.
8. Should an abstract for presentation at a meeting or a
manuscript intended for publication be produced
from the joint database – the paper being submitted
should first be sent to the steering group who
will review the manuscript. This is to ensure that
a consistent and high standard of data analysis
and interpretation is maintained. The steering
group must return comments to the author within
14 days of receipt of the MS or meeting abstract.
Failure to comply with these criteria will result in a
letter being sent to the organising committee of the
meeting or the journal editor from the steering
group.
9. It is required that a copy of any processed data
and full results of any analyses from data within
the database that has resulted in the production
of a paper accepted for publication should also
be made available to all data contributing
members. The steering group will ensure that such
analyses will be posted to a common ‘‘Results’’
folder and will notify members whose data that
were used in the analysis that results have been
posted.
10. Data downloaded from the database by one centre
for a given analysis must not be sent to any other
centre.
11. Downloaded data for a specific and declared
analysis must not be used for another analysis.
12. The database either whole or in part must not be
sold to any organisation.

620

I. Piper et al.

Guidelines for Non-Profit External Research
Organisations or Individual members
not from Data Contributing centres
wishing to Access the BrainIT Database

in the sending of a letter by the BrainIT steering group to
the editor of the journal and prevention of future access
to the common database.

Non profit making external research organisations or
individuals not from data contributing centres may not
have direct access to the common database, however,
they may gain in-direct access through collaborating
with a centre PI provided:

Group funding

1. They (the non-profit external research organisation)
are themselves registered as BrainIT group individual
members AND:
2. They (the non-profit external research organisation)
have also agreed and signed to the same Database
access criteria (Internet Based) presented to the
centre PI with whom they are collaborating.
In such a collaboration, the centre PI remains responsible for access to the database and for tracking any analyses resulting from the collaboration with Non profit
making external research organisations or individuals
not from data contributing centres.
In the event of any conflict between a centre PI and
the collaborating non-profit external research organisation, the Steering Group will make the final decision on
whether the database can be accessed and whether the
intended analyses can be performed.
Joint authorship guidelines
A. If any data from the joint database was used in the
analyses which subsequently formed part of a
published abstract or manuscript – reference to the
‘‘BrainIT Group’’ must be given in the Author’s citation. e.g.: A. Author1, A. Author2. . .& ‘‘on behalf of
the BrainIT Group’’.
B. As part of the normal BrainIT review process, all
members from centres contributing data will be
invited to both review and to contribute towards
any abstract or manuscript produced prior to submission to a meeting or for publication. Those members
who made a significant contribution to the design,
analysis or writing of the abstract=manuscript will
also be named co-authors on the abstract or manuscript. Where there is uncertainty over whether a
significant contribution was made by a given data
contributor – a final decision will be made by the
steering group.
Attempts at publishing analyses of data from the database without adhering to all the above criteria will result

The major resource cost of the BrainIT group is for
the hiring and travel support of Data Validation Staff.
These staff are currently grant funded. Grant funding
will, for the most part, remain the predominate source
of support, however, other sources of support are being
considered including by industry and public donation.
As the group expands and more project groups form
and bring in their own funding, it may be possible to
create a central DV staff resource fund based upon a
fixed percentage of project funding.
Part B: core data set definition
Defining a core dataset
In December 2000, the BrainIT group received EEC
research infrastructure support under the Quality of Life
and Management of Living Resources Programme. This
support enabled the group to meet to discuss the definition of a core dataset and to define and implement a
mechanism for determining the feasibility for collection
of the core data set from all current BrainIT group
centres (see Appendix A).
A meeting was held in Glasgow and 25 participants
from 9 countries attended. Representatives were also
present from the European Brain Injury Consortium
and from medical device manufacturers and the pharmaceutical industry.
The aim was to define a minimum or core dataset to
be collected from all head injured patients which would
be common to all future research projects. Individual
projects would then either draw from the core-dataset
or append new data elements to the core dataset on a
project-by-project basis. To facilitate discussion, the
core dataset was sub-divided into four logical groups:
a) Demographic and Clinical Information b) Minute by
Minute monitoring information c) Intensive care management information d) Secondary insult treatment
information. The meeting participants assigned themselves to one of these four groups and each group was
assigned a chairperson responsible for guiding discussion towards a consensus. Each group was given a draft
list of data elements which could potentially be included
in the core-dataset. At the completion of discussions, the

621

The BrainIT group: concept and core dataset definition

Fig. 2. Paper based – pilot data collection form. The form shows the data for patient 1, starting at 22:00 on the evening of January 12, 2001. This
patient was on ventilation from 22:40 to end of the time period, was sedated from 22:00 to 03:50, and again from 04:10 to the end of the period. The
patient was suctioned every hour at 5 minutes past the hour. Time of BP, ICP and central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring is also indicated

chairperson presented the results of their group’s consensus on the data elements to be included in the core
dataset. The meeting chairman led general discussion
towards a consensus on any data element which raised
questions as to whether it should be included in the core
dataset.
Testing the feasibility of collecting
the core dataset
A paper form was designed to test the feasibility for
collecting the core dataset from all centres. Although the
contents of a core dataset was agreed at a BrainIT
meeting, it is important to test whether those data can be
collected. For example, if only 10% of centres regularly
collect a given data element – there is little point in
collecting that data as a core data component.
Centres were asked to fill in the core data elements for
one head injured patient with at least arterial blood
pressure (BP) and intracranial pressure monitoring in
place for 8 hours or more. As this exercise was to test
the feasibility for collecting the core data, rather than
determining the accuracy of data collection, for the more
time consuming minute by minute data collection we
designed a graphical form which bed side nursing staff
could indicate, by a simple tick, once every 15 minutes,
whether the physiological channels were still being
monitored. Figure 2 shows an example chart indicating
the time-series collection of monitoring data from one
centre.

Testing the feasibility of collecting the PC
based monitoring data
The collection of the bedside minute-by-minute physiological monitoring data is the most challenging. This is
due in part to the large variation in hardware monitoring
available between centres. To test the feasibility for collecting the core minute by minute physiological monitoring data from each centre, a request went out to all centres
to collect, anonymise and transfer to the BrainIT coordinating centre in Glasgow a short sample (at least 10 minutes of minute by minute data) of the typical range of
bedside physiological monitoring that is performed in
their typical head injured patient. This data was collected
and summarised in terms of frequency of channel types.
Results
Core dataset definition
The full core dataset definition is attached as an appendix and can also
be downloaded from the BrainIT website (go to core dataset link at:
www.brainit.org).
For the core dataset, the emphasis was upon collection of data which
would normally be collected as part of routine patient management. In
the following text, we highlight, within each data collection category,
specific examples which either prompted group discussion or we felt
required further explanation.

Demographic and clinical data
This group contains data elements which are only collected once per
patient and as such are not considered time-series data. Examples being
the age and sex of the patient. To ease adherence to national and

622
international guidelines on patient data anonymity, we chose to record
and transfer a patients age as an absolute decimal number: e.g.: 53.4
years. This number is calculated by software from the patient’s date of
birth and knowing the date of injury.
The usual description of injury variables are collected with users
offered a choice from fixed categories. Medical history is focused upon
identifying previous neurological injury, substance abuse and associated
injuries.
Data elements are then collected describing the clinical status of the
patient (e.g.: GCS scores) at both pre-neurosurgical hospital admission
and at admission to the hospital with Neurosurgery. Pre-neurosurgical
hospital admission encompasses the sources of data from the Emergency
Medical Services and the Emergency=Casualty Center of the admitting
hospital (if not the hospital with neurosurgery). If data is available from
more than one source for the pre-hospital care, the data most indicative
of the patient’s post-resuscitation=pre-intubation condition at the place
of injury is chosen for the pre-neurosurgical hospital admission data.
Group discussion lead to a simplification of the scoring system for
recording pupil size and responsiveness. Both eyes are recorded individually and responsiveness classed as reacting or un-reacting. Pupil size
is recorded as small, normal or large.
CT-Scan data:
In common with many existing data collection methods, both the first
and worst CT-Scan information is collected. Classification is based upon
the Traumatic Coma Databank (TCDB) nomenclature. A selection
between a ‘‘Main Lesion’’ (none, subdural, extradural, intraparenchymal) is made and using the normal in-house methods an estimate is
made as to whether the main lesion (largest hyper-intense lesion) is
greater than or less than 25 ml in volume. Cistern state (present, compressed, absent) is also noted. The usual TCDB classification is applied
but to avoid interpretation difficulties in the ‘‘Evacuated=Non Evacuated
Mass lesion’’ categories – a consensus to record the worst CT abnormality as only a ‘‘Mass Lesion of mixed or high density of > 25 ml.
Although, by definition not part of the core-dataset, an option exists
on a project-by-project basis for collection of copies of the main CT scan
images for central reading.
Discharge status:
Consensus was achieved to collect from all patients the Extended 8point Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOSe) at 6 months post discharge from
the neurosurgical centre.
A structured questionnaire (downloadable from the Web site: http:==
www.brainit.org) is used for scoring the GOSe.
Information will also be obtained on the interview method used: in
order of preference:
1. Direct (face to face) or telephone interview with patient.
2. Direct (face to face) or telephone interview with relative.
3. Postal questionnaire to Patient=Relative – if no phone number
known
4. Telephone interview with GP.
We also will collect information on who was the ‘‘respondent’’ to the
interview: patient, relative=carer, patient þ relative=carer. Also an indication of what the ‘‘most important factor in the patients outcome is due to’’:
a) head injury, b) illness or injury to other parts of body, c) a mixture of
both.

Minute by minute monitoring data
This is the minimum minute by minute monitoring data required for
inclusion in the BrainIT Database and include: Heart Rate (specifying
source: ECG or Pulse Oximetry), Respiration Rate (sources: impedance
plethmography or ventilator), Mean Arterial Pressure, mean ICP, Pulse
Oximetry (SaO2) and Temperature (sources: rectal=oesophageal= bladder=skin.)

I. Piper et al.
However, additional variables: Central Venous Pressure (CVP),
EtCO2, SjO2, TCD, PbrO2, Brain Temperature, Microdialysis. . . will
also be included in the database if they are monitored, in a given patient,
as part of their usual clinical management.
Thus the emphasis is to not exclude data which is part of any given
centre’s normal monitoring practice and in so doing build a rich and
varied database for post-hoc analysis.

Intensive care management information
This section focuses on the baseline medical management and
monitoring of clinical status that occurs to patients more than once in
their stay in ITU. Our intention is to collect this time-series information
with a greater frequency and accuracy than has been previously
attempted.
To acquire the information with the required frequency, data here will
typically be collected by menu driven PC software or in some cases by
direct links to hardware (e.g.: infusion pump links). Start times and end
times will be given for any change in condition. Data collection methodology varies between centres.
Types of data include: GCS scores, pupil scores, ventilation settings,
sedation levels, fluid input and output, nutrition, use of vasopressors,
antibiotics.
Coded fields will annotate routine nursing (eye=mouth care, ET tube
suction, bed care.), physiotherapy and bedside interventions= investigations (line insertion=renewal, transducer calibration, x-ray.) and patient
transport (to and from Theatre=CT-Scan.).
Routine blood gases and daily laboratory values will also be recorded –
Biochemistry (Na, K þ , Glucose), Haematology (Haemaglobin, White
Cell Count, Haematocrit).
Further detail can be obtained by viewing the core dataset definition
or by downloading it from the BrainIT web-site (go to core dataset link
at: www.brainit.org).

Secondary insult management data
This is medical management=therapy given to patients specifically to
treat secondary insults which occur to patients despite their baseline
intensive care medical management.
To distinguish therapy given to patients to treat secondary insults from
those of baseline intensive care, we have devised a coding system which
allows specific categories of therapy to be assigned a ‘‘therapy target’’.
For example, arterial pressors may be given to treat systemic hypotension or to treat reduced cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) secondary to
raised ICP. By choosing an appropriate target for each secondary
insult therapy will enhance the usefulness of the database on medical
therapy.
Data here will typically be collected by menu driven PC software. It is
to be limited to non-surgical management. Start and end times must be
given.
Each Therapy must be assigned a ‘‘Target’’ chosen from a drop down
list. If drugs are given then one can indicate continuous infusion if drugs
are delivered by a continuous infusion pump or one can indicate boluses
if it is delivered non-continuously.
Figure 3 summarise the minimum choice of therapy categories and
associated targets for the BrainIT core dataset.

Paper based feasibility exercise
Having met and defined a core dataset, the group next performed a
paper based feasibility exercise. The intention being to determine if the
core data elements can be collected from the majority of centres. If only

The BrainIT group: concept and core dataset definition

623

Fig. 3. Tracking Therapies and Targets. Lists BrainIT core dataset definition therapies and therapy targets. This therapy tracking model has been
designed to be easily implemented in software

10% of centres routinely collect a given data element – then it is not
feasible to collect that item in all centres.
Specially designed forms to collect the core dataset demographic and
clinical information as well as sample the time-series data elements (see
Fig. 2) were distributed by both email and standard mail to 22 BrainIT
centres. A deadline of six weeks was set to receive completed forms
back from centres and all results were presented and discussed at the
next BrainIT group meeting.
Eighteen centres (82%) returned completed forms by the set deadline. Overall the feasibility for collection of the core data elements

was high with only 10 of the 64 questions (16%) showed missing
data. Of those 10 fields with missing data, the average number of
centres not responding to those questions was 12% and the median
6%. The maximum percentage of missing data was associated with the
question on ‘‘Associated Major Injuries’’ with a missing error rate of
33%. However, from the group discussion of the data pilot results, it
became clear that the question wording was not optimal and a field for
responding ‘‘none’’ was omitted. So it was not clear if the field was
left blank due to missing data, or there were NO associated major
injuries.

624

I. Piper et al.
Table 1. Bedside monitoring types found across centres
System type

Use networked Use RS232=AD Need
Total
solution
solution
interface

Phillips medical
Marquette
Siemens
Datex
Spacelabs
Hellege

3
2
1
1
1
1

4
3
0
2
1
0

1
1
1
0
0
0

8
6
2
3
2
1

Totals

9

10

3

22

As an example of the type of responses achieved, the bar chart in Fig. 4
gives the distribution of centre responses for two questions: a) Motor
score on arrival at the neurosurgical hospital b) Evidence of hypoxia at
the accident scene.
Group members were also invited to make comments on the form on
data elements which they felt the instructions either needed clarification
or the categories required modification. The comments were summarised
and any necessary changes to the data elements definition file discussed
at a BrainIT group meeting. In particular, it was decided that all questions should have fields for ‘‘not testable’’ and ‘‘unknown’’.

Monitoring based feasibility exercise

Fig. 4. Paper based Data Collection Results. Plot giving example
inter-centre responses for two questions from the pilot data collection
exercise

Table 1 summarises the bedside monitoring types found across centres
and Fig. 5 shows which types of monitoring data were collected and
summarised in terms of frequency of channel types. Of the 22 BrainIT
centres polled: 17 (77%) were able to return example minute by minute
bedside monitoring data by the imposed deadline. Of the remaining 5
centres: two centres have either new monitoring systems being installed

Fig. 5. Monitoring Pilot Collection results. Plot showing which types of monitoring data were collected as part of the feasibility exercise. Data is
summarised in terms of frequency of channel types

625

The BrainIT group: concept and core dataset definition
or the PI has recently moved to a different unit and data will be forthcoming. The remaining three centres currently have no PC connection to
their bedside monitoring and require assistance with developing a suitable interface. The BrainIT group is collaborating with three medical
device companies (Philips Medical, CMA Microdialysis and Licox) to
develop solutions for these centres. For the purposes of this pilot, the key
question was to determine that ‘‘minute by minute’’ data is collectable
from all centres. The data returned is only a sample and so may not be
representative of the full range of monitoring which will be collected in
future. This can only be determined from a prospective data collection
period with multiple patients data collected per centre.

Discussion
This paper has outlined the concept underlying the
BrainIT group approach to collaboration and describes
the groups efforts to define and test the feasibility for
collection of a core-dataset.

BrainIT group concept
The BrainIT group approach is to foster free and open
collaboration towards raising standards for collection
and analysis of data from patients with traumatic brain
injury. Data generated as a result of the work of the
group is also donated to a common database. The data
model used differs from previous collaborative groups
working within the field of traumatic brain injury in that
data collected as part of individual projects is openly
accessible by all who contribute data to the database.
Data collection tools used in projects collect, as a minimum, a ‘‘Core Dataset’’ which once collected and anonymised is added to a common database. The common
database will be openly accessible, through the Internet,
to all ‘‘Data Contributing’’ centres. The database will be
able to be queried over the Internet and datasets of interest can be downloaded to any member who has also
contributed data to the database.
The underlying hope is that such openness will lead
to a more diverse and innovative range of analysis
approaches than would be otherwise possible by any
fixed group of investigators with a limited range of
skills. Analyses tracking by the Steering group will
prevent duplication and may stimulate inter group
collaboration. The strength of post-hoc analyses of such
a database is in the generation of new hypotheses which
can be prospectively tested.
The success of this approach will depend upon the
correct balance between openness and control. The concept of an open access database would not have worked
in previous years, due to the difficulty of managing and
protecting such a resource. However today, the pervasive

nature of the Internet and the power and ease of use of
discussion forums and remotely administrable and auditable databases makes the implementation of such an
approach feasible. However, any such open database
can only work if it is based, to some extent, on trust.
Criteria have been set and must be met by contributors to
the database. Those accessing and analysing data will be
audited and those who fail to follow group guidelines
will be prevented from future access to the database.
The success or failure of the BrainIT group approach
will depend upon if the generation and publication of
standards, new findings and analyses outweigh any
abuse of the open access approach.

Core dataset definition
In contrast to most forms of clinical trial data collection methodologies, the BrainIT group data collection
requirements are uniquely detailed and require as a
minimum some form of PC based collection of patient
monitoring data at a collection frequency of no less than
1 sample per minute. The technical aims of the group are
to collect both monitoring and non-monitoring core
dataset elements from multiple centers using bedside,
standardized PC based data collection methods. Towards
that end, in this paper, we have outlined the groups
efforts towards defining a uniquely detailed core dataset.
A feasibility exercise was successfully carried out
demonstrating that the core dataset is collectable across
centres with an acceptably low frequency of missing
data.
However, it is not enough to just set up procedures for
collection of multi-centre data – the procedures must be
shown to work and estimates of inter and intra centre
missing data and data error rates need to be determined.
To do so requires a prospective trial of the effectiveness
of the BrainIT procedures. EEC funding has recently
been obtained to employ data validation staff, organised
on a region-by-region basis to conduct a prospective
data collection and data validation project. We estimate
between 5 and 10 patients per centre need be recruited
and Multi-centre Research Ethics Committee (MREC)
approval has been obtained. The successful completion
of this ‘‘proof of concept’’ phase will create a network of
centres capable of multi-centre computer based standardised collection of validated, high resolution, well documented management and monitoring data from patients
with TBI. The results of the data validation study will
provide a baseline measure of inter-centre missing data
and data field error rates. In addition, a mechanism for

626

testing the efficacy of maintaining patient confidentiality
will be implemented and tested. Such a network, once
tested, will be a valuable resource, not only for academic
medicine and the medical device industry, but also for
the Pharmaceutical industry as a vehicle for early Phase
I=II trials of new pharmacological therapy. In this
regard, of particular relevance to trials of therapy, will
be the advantage of using the BrainIT ‘‘therapy targets’’
(See Figure 3) instead of giving fixed criteria for adverse
events and indications for treatment. Some advantages
of this approach are: a) There is no need to come to an
agreement between centres on standard treatment, thus
allowing more centres to participate in any given study,
b) Delivers an increased possibility to study the effects
of different treatment thresholds and a wider spectrum of
treatments.
The case for raising standards
Although most trial designs incorporate data collection methods for quantifying and controlling for secondary insults that may occur during the trial period, these
measures will at best identify only major adverse events
discernible from the nurses hourly chart records. More
frequent shorter duration secondary insults are often
missed if sampling periods greater than 1 minute is used
[6]. Apart from data sampling rate there is also still
uncertainty amongst investigators as to the optimal
methodology for identification and definition of these
adverse events. In particular the duration and critical
threshold that should be used to define a specific type
of secondary insult remains unclear. A good example is
cerebral perfusion pressure insults. Over the last few
years an interest in CPP targeted therapy for head
injured patients has developed with a number of observational studies indicating that a CPP of 70 mmHg
appears to be a critical value [2, 5, 14–16, 21]. Publication of the American Guidelines for the management of
severe head injury by the Brain Trauma Foundation,
state that there is not sufficient evidence to establish
either a standard or guideline for the management of
CPP, although they indicate management of CPP greater
than 70 mmHg as a management option. However, as
yet, there are no published randomised multi-centre
trials demonstrating a benefit in patient outcome if
CPP is maintained at or beyond this threshold. Conversely, a recently published study from a single-centre
randomised CPP management trial has shown that
aggressive management of CPP > 70 mmHg, although
reducing the incidence of jugular venous desaturations

I. Piper et al.

< 50%, increased the incidence of acute respiratory
distress syndrome and worsened neurological outcome
[20, 21].
Whether it is possible to define if the optimal CPP
threshold should be set at 60 mmHg, 70 mmHg or higher
is further complicated by a number of technical issues.
These include a lack of standardisation between centres
on the site of ICP monitoring (intraventricular vs intraparenchymal vs subdural) and the technology used
(catheter-tip vs fluid-filled catheter-transducer systems).
Most arterial pressure measurement is based on fluidfilled catheter-transducer systems where the degree of
system ‘‘damping’’ is an important factor. Altering the
damping of such a system over typical limits can cause
up to a 7 mmHg bias in recorded arterial pressure [7]. In
terms of arterial pressure recording such a bias may not
be significant, but for CPP measurement, a 7 mmHg
error will make the difference to calculated CPP being
above or below a treatment threshold. Another important
source of error is the inter-centre differences in location
of the ‘‘zero’’ pressure reference site for the BP transducer. This issue alone can account for up 13 mmHg
variance in calculated CPP when combined with the
effect of hydrostatic fluid columns which depend upon
the degree of angle of head up tilt of the patient [10].
Before we can define thresholds for secondary insults, in
a multi-centre study, better standardisation between centres of the type, damping, placement and calibration of
physiological monitoring is needed.
Apart from optimising the methods for measuring
adverse events, data sampling rate is also important.
There are now a number of microcomputer based dataacquisition software systems that can be used to acquire
patient physiological data on a frequent basis (<¼ 1
sample=minute). These packages provide the means
for quantifying, with greater resolution, the degree of
secondary injury occurring in head injured patients over
specific periods of monitoring [4, 6]. As a result, secondary insults such as intracranial hypertension, and
arterial hypotension have been found to occur, in head
injured patients, more frequently than previously realised with more than 90 percent of patients exhibiting
one or more insults during their management in intensive care [12]. To accurately detect and quantify these
events, specialised computer based sampling techniques
are required and studies have shown that taking data
from the nursing charts alone often miss and frequently
underestimate the actual incidence of these events [6].
This is particularly relevant as, to date, all previous
clinical drug trials have used paper based clinical

627

The BrainIT group: concept and core dataset definition

research forms (CRF) for recording data on adverse
events with a sampling rate similar to the bedside nurses
chart.
For the above mentioned reasons, it is conceivable that
large numbers of secondary insults could be missed in a
trial. It is also possible that many of these missed events
might occur non-randomly across centres as the ability to
detect short acting secondary insults may vary between
centres depending on the type and method of monitoring
employed. It is also still unknown to what degree the
intensity of patient management and any intra=inter centre management variation influences the incidence of
short acting secondary insults. An investigator’s choice
of participating centre may be more driven by a centres
past recruitment rate rather than providing a representative sample of these other factors. For these reasons, it is
feasible that missed secondary insults could potentially
adversely influence outcome by as much or greater than a
potential neuroprotective drug, management or monitoring approach might improve outcome.
By not using appropriate high resolution standardised
data collection methods to detect these events, drug
companies or research groups cannot control for these
factors in their design and analysis and thus the power
for detecting an effect of a trial drug or a new management or monitoring approach could be significantly
reduced.

Summary
The BrainIT group is developing a multi-centre transnational network of intensive care units using standardised computer based methods capable of more
detailed collection of admission, monitoring, treatment
and outcome data from patients with brain injury. This
network will provide a unique mechanism for research
groups, pharmaceutical organisations and the medical
device industry to more effectively conduct multi-centre
trials of new health care technology in the management
of patients with brain injury. In future, this network may
also aid health authorities to monitor, maintain and raise
intra and trans-national standards in the management of
patients with brain injury. The creation of an open
access, detailed and validated database that will be useful for post-hoc hypothesis testing.
Collectively working towards raising data collection
and analysis standards is a critical aim of the BrainIT
group and the current work towards defining minimum
data validation standards and developing a mechanism
for checking the validity of data against original documentation using regionally hired ‘‘data validation’’ staff
will provide an infrastructure supporting data quality
control for trials of management or monitoring similar
to that required by the Pharmaceutical industry in the
conduct of trials of new drugs.

Appendix A
PI’s from BrainIT centres that have participated in the EEC funded Core Dataset study are shown in Bold and the additional centres also participating in
the new EEC Project in Italics. Note, this list is only a subset of the BrainIT members registered on the Website, not all of which are eligible for
participating in EEC funded projects
Centre Investigator
Chambers, Iain
Citerio, Guiseppe
Cruickshank, Garth
Czosnyka, Marek
De Jong, Dirk
Della Corte, Francesco
Dunn, Laurence
Enblad, Per
Eynon, Andrew
Fadrus, Pavel
Gjerris, Flemming
Goffin, Jan
Iencean, Stefan
Jarzemaskas, Egidijus
Kiefer, Michael
Kiening, Karl
Lemaire, Jean-Jacques
Lobato, Ramiro
Mascia, Luciana

BrainIT Centre & Country
Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle, UK
Ospedale San Gerardo di Monza, Monza, Italy
Neurosurgery, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK
Neurosurgery, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, UK
University Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Cattedra di Anestesiologica Novara, Novara, Italy.
Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, UK
University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden
Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK
Neurosurgery, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
Neurosurgery, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
Gasthuisberg Hospital, Leuven, Belgium
Neurosurgery, SF Treime Hospital, Iasi, Romania.
Neurosurgery, Vilnius University Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania
Universitatskliniken des Saarlandes, Homburg, Germany
Ruprecht-Karls-Universit€at-Heidelberg, Germany
Neurosurgery, H^opital Gabriel Montpied, Clermont-Ferrand, France
Neurosurgery, Hospital 12 Octubre, Madrid, Spain
Ospedale Molinette, Torino, Italy.

628

I. Piper et al.

Appendix A (continued)
Mixenburger, Jurgen
Nordstrom Carl-Erick
Ragauskas, Arminas
Rydenhag, Bertil
Sahuquillo, Juan
Stochetti, Nino
Stocker, Reto
Vajkoczy, Peter
Watkins, Lawrence
Whittle, Ian
Zavala, Elizabeth

Neurosurgery, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
Neurosurgery, University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden
Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
Vall d’Hebron University Hospitals Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Terapia Intensiva Neuroscienze, Milan, Italy
Universitatsspital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
University Hospital Mannheim, Manheim, Germany
Neurosurgery, National Hospital, Queen Square, London, UK
Clinical Neurosciences, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK
UCI Quirurgica, Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

References
1. Berkowitz M (1993) Assessing the socioeconomic impact of
improved treatment of head and spinal cord injuries. J Emer
Med 11: 63–67
2. Bouma GJ, Muizelaar (1990) JP Relationship between cardiac
output and cerebral blood flow in patients with intact and with
impaired autoregulation. J Neurosurg 73: 368–374
3. American Association of Neurological Surgeons, BrainTrauma Foundation – Guidelines for the management of
head injury (1995) Chicago, http==:www.Ohsu.edu=som-surgery=
Neurosurgery=guidelines
4. Chambers IR, Treadwell L, Mendelow AD (2000) The cause and
incidence of secondary insults in severely head-injured adults and
children. Brit J Neurosurg 14(5): 424–431
5. Clifton GL, Allen S, Barrodale P et al (1993) A phase II study of
moderate hypothermia in severe brain injury. J Neurotrauma 10:
263–271
6. Corrie J, Piper IR, Housley A, Tocher JL, Jones PA, Anderson SI,
Midgley S, Dearden NM, Miller JD (1993) Microcomputer based
data recording improves identification of secondary insults during
acute management of head injured patients. Br J Intensive Care 3:
225–233
7. Gabe IT (1972) Cardiovascular fluid dynamics. Acta Physiol Scand
19: 306–322
8. Ghajar et al (1995) Survey of critical care management of comatose
head injured patients in the United States. Crit Care Med 23:
560–567
9. Guidelines for the initial triage and management of head injuries
(1998) Recommendations from the society of British Neurological
Surgeons. B J Neurosurg 14(4)
10. Hydrostatic Fluid Columns, Influence upon calculated CPP.
www.brainit.org=brainit=hydrostatic.htm
11. Jeevaratnam DR, Menon DK (1996) Survey of intensive care of
severely head injured patients in the United Kingdom. BMJ 312:
944–947
12. Jones PA, Andrews PJD, Midgley S, Anderson SI, Piper IR,
Tocher JL, Housley AM, Corrie JA, Slattery J, Dearden NM, Miller
JD (1994) Measuring the burden of secondary insults in head
injured patients during intensive care. J Neurosurg Anaesth 6(1):
4–14
13. Maas AI, Dearden M, Teasdale GM et al (1997) EBIC guidelines
for management of severe head injury in adults. European Brain
Injury Consortium. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 139: 286–294
14. Marmarou A, Anderson RL, Ward JD et al (1991) Impact of ICP
instability and hypotension on outcome in patients with severe head
trauma. J Neurosurg 75: S59–S66

15. Marshall LF, Smith RW, Shapiro HM (1979) The outcome with
aggressive treatment in severe head injuries. I. The significance of
intracranial pressure monitoring. J Neurosurg 50: 20–25
16. McGraw CP (1989) A cerebral perfusion pressure greater than
80 mmHg is more beneficial. In Hoff JT, Betz AL (eds) Intracranial
pressure VII. Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York Tokyo,
pp 839–841
17. McKeating EG (1998) The intensive care of severe head injury: a
survey of non-neurosurgical centres in the United Kingdom. BJ
Neurosurg 12(1): 7–14
18. Murray DG, Teasdale GM (1999) The European brain injury consortium surveyof head injuries.Acta Neurochir (Wien) 141: 223–236
19. Piper IR, Lawson A, Dearden NM, Miller JD (1991) A microcomputer based research data collection system in head injury
intensive care. Brit J Inten Care 1(2): 73–78
20. Robertson CS, Valadka AB, Gopinath SP et al (1997) Prevention of
secondary insults after head injury. In proceedings of the 10th
International Symposium on Intracranial Pressure. In: Marmarou
A et al (eds) Williamsburg, pp 03–13
21. Robertson CS, Contant CF, Narayan RK et al (1992) Cerebral blood
flow, AVDO2, and neurologic outcome in head-injured patients. J
Neurotrauma 9: S349–S358
22. Rosner MJ, Daughton S (1990) Cerebral perfusion pressure management in head injury. J Trauma 30: 933–941
23. Signorini DF, Andrews PJD, Jones A et al (1999) Predicting
survival using simple clinical variables: a case study in traumatic
brain injury. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiat 66: 20–31
24. Teasdale GM (1997) The European brain injury consortium nemo
solus satis sapit: nobody knows enough alone. Acta Neurochir
(Wien) 139: 797–803

