     Trusting Intensive Care Unit (ICU) Medical
          Data: A Semantic Web Approach

         Laura Moss1,2,3 , David Corsar1, Ian Piper3 , and John Kinsella2
1
    Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB24 3FX
          2
            School of Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ
     3
       Department of Clinical Physics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ



       Abstract. The Intensive Care Unit (ICU) domain generates large vol-
       umes of patient data which can be used in medical research. However,
       inaccuracies often exist in this data and due to the data’s size and do-
       main complexity, automated approaches are required to associate a level
       of quality and trust with the data. We describe a computational frame-
       work to perform such assessments based on semantic web technologies.
       Linked data enables integration with other datasets, which can be used
       along with details of the data’s provenance and medical domain knowl-
       edge from appropriate ontologies. We have successfully applied the frame-
       work to two types of ICUs: general medical and traumatic brain injury.

       Keywords: Data Quality, Semantic Web, Ontologies, Critical Care.


1     Introduction
Increasing use of patient monitoring equipment in medicine is generating large
repositories of patient data, which are recorded manually and/or automatically.
Trusting this data is important: along with being used for medical decision mak-
ing, the data is often stored for oﬄine analysis. However, error rates of between
2.3% and 26.9% are common [5]. Various methods have been proposed to im-
prove the quality of medical data (e.g.[6]), which may help avoid certain errors
(e.g. physiologically impossible values). However, detailed domain knowledge and
human judgement is often required to identify other, more subtle errors, e.g. a
recorded heart rate of 120 may be identiﬁed as an error by a simple threshold
based rule, but if the patient was suﬀering from sepsis at the same time, then
the value may actually be a symptom of that disorder.
    Recently, interlinked datasets have been made openly available on the Web
of Linked Data. These datasets are described by ontologies, published according
to a set of principles, and linked through the use of technologies such as URIs,
HTTP, and RDF. This enables provision of contextual information about any
piece of data, along with enabling machines to access, browse, and reason with
it1 . Most existing approaches to assessing the quality of linked data focus on
the application of simple rules or policies; e.g. the WIQA framework, which
1
    http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html

N. Peek, R. Marı́n Morales, and M. Peleg (Eds.): AIME 2013, LNAI 7885, pp. 68–72, 2013.

c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
                          Trusting Intensive Care Unit (ICU) Medical Data       69

adopts the “fitness for use” perspective to data quality, applies a set of policies
to ﬁlter RDF data that does not meet requirements [1]. In contrast, the SWIQA
framework adopts the “free of defects” perspective, using a series of rules to
perform common data quality checks on RDF datasets including: completeness
(e.g. provision of mandatory values), syntactic and semantic accuracy, timeliness,
and uniqueness [3]. However, we argue these assessments do not consider the
complexities of real world datasets and need to be extended to include context
dependent assessments.
   In this paper, Section 2 describes our novel approach and framework that
applies Semantic Web technologies to assess the quality of medical datasets, by
considering the data, its provenance, and relevant clinical knowledge; Section
3 describes the application of our framework to two diﬀerent medical domains;
and Section 4 concludes by discussing our ﬁndings and future work plans.


2   Approach

Our approach consists of three stages: converting the medical data into RDF;
optionally annotating the data with provenance information; and ﬁnally, assess-
ing the data (Figure 1). Ideally, all of the datasets we describe below would be
reused from the Web of Linked Data or open data repositories. However, some
of the required information is not available; in these cases we have created our
own datasets, which we intend to contribute to the Linked Open Data cloud.




           Fig. 1. Overview of the approach to medical data assessment



  Data Conversion. In this stage an RDF version of the medical data, expressed
against the Patient Data and Medical Observations ontologies is created. For
the two case studies described in this paper, we have developed a program that
generates a series of SPARQL update statements to produce the desired RDF
dataset; RDB2RDF was considered but was not appropriate for how a case study
dataset was represented (as a spreadsheet). The Patient Data (pd) ontology [2]
70     L. Moss et al.

provides classes for representing Patients, Sessions, and Timepoints. Each Time-
point is associated with a set of Readings which refer to the Parameter being
observed and its value. The Medical Observations ontology deﬁnes a series of
axioms that integrate our patient ontology with the W3C Semantic Sensor Net-
work (ssn) Incubator Group’s sensor ontology [4] and allows the pd:Readings to
be linked to the machines/sensors that produced them. We deﬁne pd:Reading
as a subclass of ssn:ObservationValue (which represents the value produced by
some sensing process); pd:Parameter (representing things that were recorded) as
a subclass of ssn:Property; and pd:Patient as a ssn:FeatureOfInterest. To repre-
sent a pd:Timepoint as a set of observations, we use the Observation Collection
pattern [4], deﬁning pd:Timepoint as a subclass of mo:ObservationCollection,
which has an associated set of ssn:Observations.
   Provenance Annotation. This optional, semi-automatic stage involves anno-
tating the patient observations with provenance, considered as “a description
of the entities and processes involved in producing ... that resource” [4]. Pro-
viding provenance information increases the available types of assessments com-
pared to solely using the observations. In this framework, we capture details
of the sensors that were responsible for producing the pd:Readings. Our Med-
ical Machine/Sensor ontology (mms), extends the SSN ontology with classes
and individuals representing the machines used in our medical evaluation. We
have deﬁned mms:Machine as a subclass of ssn:Platform, and various sub-
classes of ssn:Sensor for the diﬀerent types of sensors on the machine. Each
sensor is then described in terms of the ssn:Sensing process that is imple-
ments, the ssn:Property it observes, and its ssn:MeasurementCapability. The
machine recording settings annotate the observations with knowledge about
how the sensors were conﬁgured to record the data; this knowledge is provided
by the Conﬁguration ontology (c). For example, the speciﬁcation of the sam-
pling rate is described using the c:MachineConﬁguration class, which references
a set of c:RecordingConﬁgurations, which, in turn, describe the mms:Machine
or ssn:Sensor used to record a parameter between two timepoints in a session.
   Data Checking. This component evaluates the medical data using the avail-
able information and assessment rules represented as SPARQL queries (Table
1). For each patient, a single temporary assessment dataset is created consist-
ing of the patient observations RDF dataset, the medical domain ontology, the
SSN ontology, and provenance annotations. A program then loads and executes
each assessment query, storing the results in a separate ﬁle which is used later
to generate a summary of the analysis. If a value is identiﬁed as an error it is
annotated with ‘Possible Error’ (PoE) or a ‘Probable Error’ (PrE); where PrE
is more likely to be an error than PoE. Deﬁnitions of acceptable values, sen-
sor accuracies, and medical conditions & treatments are provided by ontologies,
enabling reuse of existing knowledge and as the rules are expressed at the onto-
logical level, their reuse across multiple domains without modiﬁcation; whereas
other approaches e.g. complex event processing and rule engines do not easily
allow for this. RDF also provides a common representational formalism, allowing
data to be provided in a proprietary format, e.g. database or spreadsheet.
                              Trusting Intensive Care Unit (ICU) Medical Data           71

                              Table 1. Example assessments

      Name                            Details of Rule                         Conclusion
      Missing    If, for every sequential pair of readings, the time period      PrE
      Data 3           between them does not equal the sampling rate
    Acceptable If the recorded value is less than the min. acceptable value       PrE
     Range 1
    Acceptable If the recorded value is greater than the max. acceptable          PrE
     Range 2                                value
    Acceptable       If an accuracy value (deﬁning a +/- value or %) is           PoE
     Range 3    associated with the sensor AND the recorded value minus
                      accuracy value is below the min. acceptable value
    Acceptable       If an accuracy value (deﬁning a +/- value or %) is       No longer an
     Range 4 associated with the sensor AND the recorded value plus the           error
                      accuracy value is above the min. acceptable value
    Acceptable       If an accuracy value (deﬁning a +/- value or %) is           PoE
     Range 5 associated with the sensor AND the recorded value plus the
                     accuracy value is above the max. acceptable value
     Medical   If the recorded value is outwith its acceptable range AND        Reclassify
     Disorders   is associated with a symptom of a disorder, AND at the       from PrE to
      Rule 1     same time other symptoms associated with the disorder            PoE
    Treatments If the recorded value is outwith its acceptable range AND        Reclassify
      Rule 1       is associated with an eﬀect of a treatment AND that        from PrE to
                     treatment was administered previous to that value            PoE



3      Evaluation

We have applied our framework to data taken from two types of ICUs: general
medical and traumatic brain injury (TBI)2 . In both cases, time series physio-
logical data was collected from patient monitoring equipment, but the machines
used, parameters recorded, and frequency of data collection diﬀers. We were able
to reuse the same clinical domain ontology for both evaluations. For the Medical
Disorders rule, we created speciﬁc queries for hypotension and hypertension; and
for the Treatments rule, queries for eﬀects of noradrenaline and adrenaline.
   For the TBI domain, we used data consisting of 37 patients, 595,439 distinct
timepoints, 4,467,949 observations for 14 parameters, and the resulting RDF
consists of 52,093,104 triples. Glasgow Royal Inﬁrmary’s (GRI) general medical
ICU dataset consisted of 209 patients, 68,142 distinct timepoints, 687,393 obser-
vations for 14 parameters, and the resulting RDF consists of 41,819,163 triples.
In both domains, data is collected every minute, exported every minute in the
TBI domain, and exported hourly in the GRI domain; the machine recording
and export conﬁguration tools were set accordingly.
   Missing Data Rule 3 found 27,002 (≥0.6%) and 64,307 (≥9.4%) sequences
of missing data points for the TBI and GRI datasets respectively. In the TBI
dataset, 376,389 (9.4%) values were found to be less than the min. acceptable for
a parameter, and 1,386,262 (31%) were found to be higher than the max.; when
2
    Further evaluation results are available at: http://www.abdn.ac.uk/~ csc316
72        L. Moss et al.

sensor accuracies were considered 18,839 additional errors were found and 19,604
of the original errors removed. In the GRI dataset, 129,716 (18.9%) values were
found to be less than the min. acceptable for a parameter, and 189,601 (27.6%)
were found to be higher than the max.; when sensor accuracies were considered
272,357 additional errors were found and 159,219 of the original errors removed.
In the GRI dataset, a number of readings identiﬁed by Acceptable Range Rules
1 & 2 may have been aﬀected by hypertension (91%), hypotension (85.6%),
noradrenaline (24.2%) and adrenaline (6.7%)3 . A number of TBI values may
also be aﬀected by hypertension (92.1%) and hypotension (80.5%).

4      Discussion and Future Work
We have shown that our approach can be successfully applied to assess medical
data and illustrates the beneﬁt of additional contextual information provided by
linking data. Using a simple approach, a large number of acceptable range errors
are identiﬁed; however, when the context of the data is considered, many are re-
classiﬁed or new errors are identiﬁed. In the future we plan to investigate: further
context dependent rules; detection of interventions that have been carried out on
a patient but not recorded; and using High Performance Computing to improve
performance times, e.g. it took 2 hours 8 mins to apply the Medical Disorders
rules which clearly would not be practical if used regularly in a clinical setting.

Acknowledgements. The staﬀ and patients of the ICU Unit, GRI. This work
was an extension of the routine audit process in GRI’s ICU; requirements for
further Ethical Committee Approval have been waved. The authors would like
to acknowledge the work of the BrainIT group investigators and participating
centres to the BrainIT dataset.

References
1. Bizer, C., Cyganiak, R.: Quality-driven information ﬁltering using the WIQA policy
   framework. Journal of Web Semantics 7(1), 1–10 (2009)
2. Corsar, D., Moss, L., Sleeman, D., Sim, M.: Supporting the Development of Medical
   Ontologies. In: Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications: Formal Ontolo-
   gies Meet Industry, pp. 114–125 (2009)
3. Furber, C., Hepp, M.: SWIQA - A Semantic Web Information Quality Assessment
   Framework. In: Proc. of ECIS (2011)
4. Gil, Y., Cheney, J., Groth, P., Hartig, O., Miles, S., Moreau, L., Pinheiro da Silva, P.
   (eds.): Provenance xg ﬁnal report. W3C Incubator Group Report (December 2010)
5. Goldberg, S.I., Niemierko, A., Turchin, A.: Analysis of data errors in clinical research
   databases. In: AMIA Annu. Symp. Proc., vol. 6, pp. 242–246 (2008)
6. Hogan, W.R., Wagner, M.M.: Accuracy of Data in Computer-based Patient Records.
   J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 4(5), 342–355 (1997)

3
     The rule was not applied to the TBI dataset as it contains sparsely collected treat-
     ment information.
